Casting Your Vote: Alternatives to Traditional Voting 
For Consumers of Long-Term Care FACT  SHEET The right to vote is a cornerstone in our society.  However, the voting process can sometimes be complicated and  confusing.  Long-term care facility residents and other  consumers receiving long-term care services and supports retain their voting rights no matter where they live or what type of care they receive. These individuals often face unique  challenges when attempting to participate in the  political process. Some individuals have difficulties voting in the traditional way (finding your local polling place and  going in person on Election Day to cast your ballot). This fact sheet is intended to provide information for all longterm care consumers on alternative ways to cast their votes during this election season.  
How Do I Vote? 
First, you need to be registered to vote.  Find out how to register by visiting www.usa.gov/register-to-vote or calling 1-844-872-4681. Already registered? Continue reading to learn about your voting options. 
Absentee Voting 

Absentee voting is conducted by mail-in paper ballot prior to the day of the election. Ballots can be returned via mail or in-person at a designated drop-off point. Typically,  absentee ballots must be requested at least a week before the election. While all states offer some version of it, there is a lot of variation in each state's procedures. In 21 states, an excuse is required.1 In 27 states and the District of  Columbia, absentee ballots can be obtained without an  excuse.2 
( In all states requiring an excuse, a physical disability preventing an individual from getting to the polls  permits an absentee ballot.  

( In many states where an excuse is required, individuals aged 60- 65 or older can qualify for an absentee ballot. ( In some states requiring an excuse, individuals who are the primary caregiver of an ill or physically disabled  person can be permitted to use an absentee ballot. Twenty-three states3 permit mobile polling - supervised absentee voting administered by local election officials in long-term care facilities.  Some states determine where  mobile polling will be offered based on the number of  people who have requested absentee ballots, and others on the number of registered voters in residence. Contact your local elections office to arrange mobile polling in your  facility. 
Early Voting 
Thirty seven states plus the District of Columbia offer some type of early voting. Early voting allows voters to visit an election official's office or, in some states, other satellite voting locations, and cast a vote in person without offering an excuse for why the voter is unable to vote on election day.  
Some states restrict voting to certain periods of time.4  Most early voting takes place between three and 45 days prior to Election Day. 
Three states - Washington, Oregon and Colorado - provide mail ballots to all eligible voters in every election.  A ballot is automatically mailed to every eligible voter (no request or application is necessary). 
 
Voting in Your Facility 
Some nursing homes are official polling places, and  residents are able to vote early or on Election Day within their facility.  State elections offices may have an existing policy of creating poll sites in nursing homes, or facilities can contact their local elections office to apply to become an official polling site. 
Curbside Voting 
Some polling places allow voters who have difficulty  entering polling places to vote at the curbside, without  having to exit your vehicle or enter the building.  To find a polling site offering curbside voting, contact your local  elections office. 
How Do I Get Help Voting? 
Voting Assistance 
Individuals with Hearing or Seeing Impairments 
( The Americans with Disabilities Act mandates  special assistance for voters with hearing or seeing impairments.   
( Services available for individuals with hearing  impairments include:  Sign language interpreters and written notes 
( Services available for individuals with seeing  impairments: a qualified reader (a person who is able to read effectively, accurately, and impartially using  necessary specialized vocabulary) or audio recording with headphones and information in large print or 
Braille  
Accessible Voting Devices 
(      All states provide some type of accessible voting device.  
These devices may include a variety of tactile switches (different buttons coded by color and shape), so those with mobility impairments have an easier time voting. 
Assistance from Another Person 

(          Federal Law gives voters with disabilities the right to decide whether to get assistance in casting a ballot and who will provide it.  Choose a poll worker, friend, family member, caregiver, or almost anyone else.  
( To receive any of the aforementioned assistance voting, contact your state elections office:  www.eac.gov/ voter_resources/contact_your_state.aspx  
Where Can I Get More Information? Online 
www.eac.gov/voter_resources/contact_your_state.aspx - Find contact information for your state elections office and information on how to register to vote in your state https://www.usa.gov/voting - Get information on all voting questions including registration deadlines and how to  contact your local elections office. 
( Live chat at https://www.usa.gov/chat ( Email at https://www.usa.gov/email  www.canivote.org - Get registered or check if you are  already registered; find your polling place; know what kind of ID to bring; find information on absentee and early voting in your state 
www.usvotefoundation.org - Register to vote; request an absentee ballot; find information about election dates and deadlines and voting methods by state 
(        Can't find an answer to your question? Use their Voter 
   Help Desk: www.usvotefoundation.org/voter-help-desk  www.theconsumervoice.org/get_help - If you feel like your voting rights have been violated or you need additional help finding information about your local voting options, contact the local long-term care ombudsman program. 
By Phone 
For general information about voting or to find information on your local elections office, call USA.gov at  1-844-872-4681. If you have a question about how you can get assistance voting, call the Election Protection Coalition at 1-866-OUR-VOTE. 
