FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE:
 
CONTACT: 
[NAME]
[ORGANIZATION]
[PHONE NUMBER]
[EMAIL]
[WEBSITE]
 
 
[ORGANIZATION] Announces Participation in National Disability Voter Registration Week
 
[CITY, STATE] - [ORGANIZATION] is proud to announce our participation in a national, nonpartisan effort to increase the political participation of people with disabilities. This effort, known as the REV UP Campaign, has designated July 16-20, 2018 as National Disability Voter Registration Week in advance of the November elections. The REV UP Campaign, coordinated nationally by the American Association of People with Disabilities (AAPD), focuses on voter registration, education, and engagement. REV UP stands for Register! Educate! Vote! Use your Power!
 
[INSERT DETAILS ABOUT YOUR NDVRW EVENT(S). INCLUDE DATES, TIMES, LOCATIONS, AND ORGANIZER CONTACT INFORMATION.]
 
Below are the top three reasons to pay close attention to the REV UP Campaign: 
 
3)      At a level that never achieved before, national and state disability organizations are actively registering voters and planning get out the DISABILITY VOTE leading up to Election Day. REV UP partners include the American Association of People with Disabilities (AAPD), National Disability Rights Network (NDRN), National Council on Independent Living (NCIL), EveryLibrary, state protection and advocacy agencies, local centers for independent living, state councils on developmental disabilities, local libraries, and many other state and local organizations.
 
2)      The disability community has a huge stake in the results of the local, state, and federal elections this November. Our elected officials make decisions that affect the programs and services people with disabilities rely on to receive healthcare and live independently in the community of their choice. Justin Dart, father of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), said it best: "Vote as if your life depended on it, because it does."
 
1)      There are over 35 million people with disabilities who are eligible to vote. This number increases to over 62 million when we include family members in the same household. The number of "disability voters" continues to increase when we consider the ripple effect of the disability vote that connects families, friends, advocates, educators, providers, and other individuals that interact with people with disabilities. There is incredible potential for the disability community to bring disability issues to the forefront of elections and to hold elected officials accountable for policies and decisions that affect people with disabilities. It all starts with getting more people with disabilities registered to vote and REVed UP to cast a ballot.
 
AAPD is pleased to once again partner with EveryLibrary to bring National Disability Voter Registration Week 2018 to libraries across the country. In 2017, over 150 libraries across 46 states participated in NDVRW through programming, outreach, public education, and voter registration partnerships or on-site services. Learn more about the AAPD and EveryLibrary partnership.
 
For more information on the REV UP Campaign and National Disability Voter Registration Week, visit www.aapd.com/NDVRW. The REV UP Campaign offers a host of information on registering to vote, ways to drive civic engagement, and state-specific resources and events.
 
* * *
 
 
ABOUT [ORGANIZATION]
[INSERT BRIEF ORGANIZATION DESCRIPTION]
 
ABOUT THE REV UP CAMPAIGN
The REV UP Campaign, launched by the American Association of People with Disabilities (AAPD) in 2016, is a nonpartisan initiative that coordinates with national, state, and local disability organizations to increase the political power of the disability community while also engaging candidates and the media on disability issues. The Campaign focuses on voter registration, education, access, and engagement. REV UP stands for Register! Educate! Vote! Use your Power! Learn more at www.aapd.com/REVUP.
