State Laws Affecting the Voting Rights of People with Mental Disabilities[1] 
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes ALABAMA No person who is mentally incompetent shall be qualified to vote, unless the disability has been removed. ALA. CONST. art. 8, § 177(b). 
 
Persons disqualified under the Constitution are not entitled to vote. ALA. CODE § 17-330. 
 
 In a limited guardianship, the partially 
incapacitated person retains all legal rights which the court has not seen fit to delegate to the limited guardian. Comment to ALA. CODE § 26-2A-105. Consumers of mental health services have the same general rights as other citizens of Alabama, including the right to vote and participate in the political process. ALA. 
CODE § 22-56-4(a)(5). Persons with developmental disabilities and traumatic brain injury have the right to vote and participate in the political process, subject to applicable laws. ALA. CODE § 38-9C-4(7). 
 
Persons with developmental disabilities and traumatic brain injury are presumed competent until a court determines otherwise. ALA. CODE § 38-9C4(5). ALASKA No person may vote who has been judicially determined to be of "unsound mind" unless the disability has been removed. ALASKA CONST. art. 5, § 2. 
 
The judicial determination of unsoundness of mind necessary to disqualify a mentally impaired individual from voting must be specifically raised in a guardianship hearing or raised in a separate proceeding. Alaska Att'y Gen. Op. (Inf.) No. 123 (Aug. 28, 1992). Guardian may not prohibit a ward from registering or voting. ALASKA STAT. 
§ 13.26.150(e)(6).  
 
An incapacitated person for whom a guardian has been appointed is not presumed to be incompetent and retains all legal and civil rights except those that have been expressly limited by court order or have been specifically granted to the guardian by the court. ALASKA STAT. 
§ 13.26.090. Persons undergoing mental health evaluation or treatment may not be denied the right to vote. 
Undergoing court-ordered mental health treatment is not a determination of legal incapacity. ALASKA 
STAT. § 47.30.835(a)(b).  ARIZONA No person who is adjudicated an incapacitated person shall be qualified to vote. ARIZ. CONST. art. 7, § 2(C). 
 
The County Recorder shall cancel a voter's registration if they are adjudicated an incapacitated person under ARIZ. REV. STAT. § 14-5101. ARIZ. REV. STAT. § 16165. 
Not qualified to register to vote if adjudicated an incapacitated person. ARIZ. REV. STAT. 
§ 16-101(A)(6). Voter registration cancelled if a person under guardianship is committed as an "insane person" in a court proceeding. ARIZ. REV. STAT. § 16165(C).  
 
Incapacitated person defined as any person who is impaired by reason of mental illness, mental deficiency, mental disorder, physical illness or disability, chronic use of drugs, chronic intoxication or other cause, except minority, to the extent that he lacks sufficient understanding or capacity to make or communicate responsible decisions regarding his person. In cases of limited guardianship only, a person is not deemed an incapacitated person for purposes of voting if the person files a petition, has a Persons undergoing courtordered mental health evaluation or treatment are not determined to be legally incompetent. Persons undergoing mental health evaluation or treatment may not be denied the right to vote. ARIZ. REV. STAT. § 36506(A).   
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes   hearing and the judge determines by clear and convincing evidence that the person retains sufficient understanding to exercise the right to vote. ARIZ. REV. STAT. § 14-5101(1).   ARKANSAS Registration to vote cancelled if a person is adjudged mentally incompetent by a court of competent jurisdiction. ARK. CONST. AMEND. 51, § 11(a)(6). If guardian appointed prior to Oct. 1, 2001, guardian must obtain express court approval to prohibit voting. ARK. CODE ANN. § 28-65302(a)(1)(E). 
 
No guardian appointed on or after Oct. 1, 2001 shall authorize an incapacitated person to vote without filing a petition and receiving express court approval. ARK. CODE ANN. §28-65-302(a)(2)(E). 
 
An incapacitated person for whom a guardian has been appointed is not presumed to be incompetent and retains all legal and civil rights except those which have been expressly limited by court order or have been specifically granted by order to the guardian by the court. ARK. 
CODE ANN. § 28-65-106. No person shall be deemed incompetent to vote solely by reason of that person's admission to a mental health services system. ARK. CODE ANN. 
§ 20-47-220(b).  CALIFORNIA The Legislature shall provide for the disqualification of electors while mentally incompetent CAL. CONST. art. 2, § 4. 
 
A person shall be deemed mentally incompetent, and therefore disqualified from voting, if (i) the court finds by clear and convincing evidence that the person cannot communicate, with or without reasonable accommodations, a desire to participate in the voting process and (ii) a conservator is appointed or the person has pled or been found not guilty by reason of insanity. CAL. ELEC. CODE § 2208(a). 
 
If the proceeding under the Welfare and Institutions Code is heard by a jury, the jury shall unanimously find that the person cannot communicate, with or without reasonable accommodations, a desire to participate in the voting process before the person shall be disqualified from voting.  
CAL. ELEC. CODE § 2208(b).   
 
Conservatee's capability of communicating, with or without reasonable 
accommodations, a desire to vote in the Person under conservatorship is disqualified from voting if court finds by clear and convincing evidence that he or she cannot communicate, with or without reasonable accommodations, a desire to participate in the voting process; must review their capability of communicating, with or without reasonable accommodations, a desire to vote in the voting process during the yearly or biennial review of conservatorship. CAL. PROB. CODE § 1910; CAL. ELEC. CODE § 2208 and § 2209(a).   
 Conservatorship report shall include recommendation for or against the disqualification of the person from voting. CAL. WEL. & INST. CODE § 5357(c).   
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes  voting process shall be reviewed yearly or biennially. CAL. ELEC. CODE § 2209(a).      COLORADO No constitutional disqualification provision. 
Right to vote is not lost because of confinement in a state institution for persons with mental illness. COLO. REV. STAT. § 1-2103(5).  People receiving evaluation, care, or treatment for mental illness shall be given the opportunity to exercise his right to register and to vote in primary and general elections. The agency or 
facility providing evaluation, care, or treatment shall assist such persons, upon their request, to obtain voter registration forms and mail ballots and to comply with any other prerequisite for voting. COLO. REV. 
STAT. § 27-65-120. Each person with intellectual and developmental disabilities receiving services who is eligible to vote under the law has the right to vote and all service agencies should assist those receiving services with registration, obtaining mail ballots, complying with other requirements that are prerequisite to voting, and voting. COLO. REV. STAT. § 25.5-
10-225. CONNECTICUT No constitutional disqualification provision. 
 
No mentally incompetent person shall be admitted as an elector. CONN. GEN. STAT. § 9-12(a). The guardian or conservator of an individual may file a petition in probate court to determine such individual's competency to vote in a primary, referendum or election. CONN. GEN. STAT. § 45a703. Persons under hospitalization or treatment for psychiatric disabilities may vote unless such patient has been declared specifically incapable of voting and appointed a conservator. CONN. GEN. STAT. § 17a541.  DELAWARE No person adjudged mentally incompetent... or incapacitated under the provisions of this Constitution from voting, shall enjoy the right of an elector. DEL. CONST. art. 5, § 2. 
No person adjudged mentally incompetent... shall be a qualified voter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "adjudged mentally incompetent" refers to a specific finding in a judicial guardianship or equivalent proceeding, based on clear and convincing evidence that the individual has a severe cognitive impairment which precludes exercise of basic voting judgment. 15 DEL. CODE ANN. § 1701.     
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA Not a qualified elector if legally incompetent as adjudged by a court of law. D.C. CODE §1-1001.02(E). An finding that a person is incapacitated is not considered a finding of legal incompetence.  Such person retains all legal rights and abilities other than those expressly limited or curtailed in the order of appointment of a guardian or in a protective proceeding, or subsequent order of the court. D.C. CODE § 21-2004. 
 A person admitted or committed for treatment pursuant to this chapter may not, by reason of the admission or treatment, be denied the right to vote unless the person has been adjudicated incompetent and has not been restored to legal capacity. D.C. CODE § 21-564(a). 
 The board of elections shall take reasonable steps to facilitate voting by blind persons and persons with physical and developmental disabilities qualified to vote and to authorize such persons to cast a ballot with the assistance of a person of their own choosing. D.C. CODE § 1-1001.05. FLORIDA Not qualified to vote if adjudicated, in this 
or any other state, to be mentally incompetent, until the disability has been removed. FLA. CONST. art. 6, § 4(a). 
 
A resident of a residential facility who has reached his eighteenth birthday and is otherwise qualified to vote is eligible to vote, provided such person has not been adjudicated mentally incompetent. Att'y Gen. Op. No. 074-15 (Jan. 9, 1974). 
 
Not entitled to vote if adjudicated mentally incapacitated with regard to voting in this or any other state and right not restored. 
FLA. STAT. § 97.041(2)(a). Right to vote can be removed if a person is determined to be incapacitated, but right may not be delegated to a guardian. FLA. STAT. 
§ 744.3215(2)(b). 
 
Persons must be evaluated for voting disqualification at guardianship proceedings. 
FLA. STAT. § 744.331(3)(g)(2). Any patient who is eligible to vote has the right to vote and the department shall establish rules to enable patients to obtain voter registration forms, applications for vote-bymail ballots, and vote-bymail ballots. FLA. STAT. § 394.459(7). [To take effect 7/1/16] No otherwise qualified person shall, by reason of having a developmental disability, be denied the right to vote in public elections. FLA. STAT. 
§ 393.13(3)(j). GEORGIA A person adjudicated mentally incompetent cannot register, remain registered, or vote unless the disability has been removed. GA. CONST. art. 2, § 1, ¶ III(b); GA. CODE ANN. § 21-2-216(b). 
 
A person must be adjudicated mentally incompetent before the right to vote is removed. Ga. Att'y Gen. Op. No. 95-27 (1995). The appointment of a guardian is not a determination regarding the right of the ward to vote. GA. CODE ANN. § 29-4-20(b). Patients may vote if otherwise eligible under state law. The 
superintendent or regional state hospital administrator of each facility shall permit and reasonably assist patients 
(1) to obtain voter registration forms, applications for absentee ballots, and absentee ballots; (2) to comply with other requirements which are prerequisite for voting; and (3) to vote by absentee ballot if necessary. GA. CODE ANN. § 37-3-144. Clients may vote if otherwise eligible. The superintendent or regional state hospital administrator of each facility shall permit and reasonably assist clients: (1) to obtain voter registration forms, applications for absentee ballots, and absentee ballots; (2) to comply with other requirements which are prerequisite for voting; and (3) to vote by absentee ballot if necessary. GA. CODE ANN. 
§ 37-4-104.  
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes HAWAII No person who is "non compos mentis" shall be qualified to vote. HAW. CONST. art. 2, § 2. 
 
Whenever the clerk receives from the department of health or any informing agency, information of... adjudication as an incapacitated person under the provisions of chapter 560... the clerk shall thereupon make such investigation as may be necessary to prove or disprove the information, giving the person concerned, if available, notice and an opportunity to be heard. If after the investigation the clerk finds that the person is... incapacitated to the extent that the person lacks sufficient understanding or capacity to make or communicate responsible decisions concerning voting... the clerk shall remove the name of the person from the register. 
HAW. REV. STAT. § 11-23(a). Definition of mental incapacity as referenced in electoral statutes: "Incapacitated person" means an individual who, for reasons other than being a minor, is unable to receive and evaluate information or make or communicate decisions to such an extent that the individual lacks the ability to meet essential requirements for physical health, safety, or self-care, even with appropriate and reasonably available technological assistance. 
HAW. REV. STAT. § 560:5-102. Admission to psychiatric facility itself does not modify or vary the right to vote. HAW. REV. STAT. 
§ 334-61.  IDAHO No disqualification statute.  Mental health facility cannot deny right to vote unless right limited by prior court order. This right shall not be denied by the director of the facility under any circumstances. IDAHO CODE § 66-346(a)(6) & 
(c). Developmentally disabled persons have the right to vote 
unless limited by prior court order. IDAHO CODE § 66-
412(3)(j). ILLINOIS No disqualification statute. 
 
Every patient of any hospital or mental institution in this State shall be deemed a resident of the town, city, village or election district or precinct in which he resided next prior to becoming a patient of such hospital or mental institution. However, the term "hospital" does not include skilled nursing facilities. 10 ILL. 
COMP. STAT. 5/3-4. 
 
Any person who is a resident of certain certified and licensed facilities or "community-integrated living 
arrangements" for 30 days or longer, and who is a U.S. citizen and has resided in this     
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes  State and election district 30 days preceding any election shall be entitled to vote in the election district in which any such home or community-integrated living arrangement in which he is located, provided that he shall declare upon oath that it was his bona fide intention at the time he entered said home or communityintegrated living arrangement to become a resident thereof. 10 ILL. COMP. STAT. 5/33. 
 
"Community-integrated living 
arrangement" means a living arrangement certified by a community mental health or developmental services agency under [the] Act where 8 or fewer recipients with mental illness or recipients with a developmental disability who reside under the supervision of the agency. 210 ILL. COMP. STAT. 
135/3(d).    INDIANA No disqualification provision or statute.    IOWA A person adjudged mentally incompetent to vote or a person convicted of any infamous crime shall not be entitled to the privilege of an elector. IOWA CONST. art. 2, § 5. 
 
A person who is incompetent to vote is disqualified from registering and voting. Certification by the clerk of the district court that has found the person no longer incompetent shall qualify such person to vote again if otherwise eligible. IOWA CODE ANN. § 48A.6(2).  
 
"Person who is incompetent to vote" means a person with an intellectual disability who has been found to lack the mental capacity to vote in a proceeding to appoint a guardian. IOWA CODE ANN. § 48A.2(3). When a guardian is appointed for a person based upon mental incapacity of the proposed ward because the proposed ward is a person with an "intellectual disability", the court shall make a separate determination as to the ward's competency to vote. The court shall find a ward incompetent to vote only upon determining that the person lacks sufficient mental capacity to comprehend and exercise the right to vote. 
IOWA CODE ANN. § 633.556. 
 
A person under an order appointing a guardian which order found the person incompetent to vote may include a request for reinstatement of voting rights as part of the termination procedure or in a separate determination. IOWA CODE ANN. § 633.679. 
 
The vote of a legal incompetent shall be cast by the guardian, or other legal representative along with a written sworn statement. IOWA CODE ANN. § 468.513.   KANSAS No disqualification statute.   Any voter unable to mark such person's ballot by reason 
of a disability (physical or mental impairment that  
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes     substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual) may request assistance in voting. KAN. STAT. ANN. 
§ 25-2909. KENTUCKY "Idiots" and "insane" persons shall not have the right to vote. KY. CONST. § 145(3). 
 
Anyone disqualified under the Constitution may not vote. KY. REV. STAT. ANN. 
§ 116.025(1). 
 
Individuals declared incompetent solely for the purpose of appointing a 
committee to manage their welfare checks would not be disqualified from voting and are prima facie qualified to vote. Ky. Att'y Gen. Op. No. 73-700 (1973). 
 
Person declared incompetent but not declared "insane" would be entitled to register to vote if otherwise qualified. 
Ky. Att'y Gen. Op. No. 76-549 (1976). If a court finds that a person is in need of a guardianship or conservatorship, the court must specifically determine whether the person retains the right to vote. KY. REV STAT. ANN. 
§ 387.580(3)(c).  
 
Ward shall only be deprived of right to vote if the court separately and specifically makes a finding on the record. KY. REV. STAT. ANN. 
§ 387.590(10)   LOUISIANA Right to vote may be suspended while interdicted and judicially declared mentally incompetent. LA. CONST. art. 1, § 10(A). 
 
An individual who has been fully interdicted after being judicially declared to be mentally incompetent may not vote. An individual who is only partially interdicted is allowed to vote unless there has been a specific suspension of the right to vote. LA. 
STAT. ANN. § 18:102(A)(2).  Patients in treatment facilities shall not be deprived of the right to vote because of status as a patient in a treatment facility. The determination of incompetence shall be separate from the judicial determination of whether the person is a proper subject for involuntary commitment. LA. STAT. ANN. § 28:171(A) & (B). 
 Department of Health and 
Hospitals shall establish rules and regulations to ensure that persons with intellectual or cognitive disabilities who have not been interdicted or partially interdicted with a specific suspension of the right to vote are permitted to vote. LA. STAT. ANN. 
§ 18:102.1(B). 
 
Voters who provide a statement setting forth the necessity and reasons for assistance on election day and a copy of current 
documentation showing 
eligibility for benefits from the office for citizens with developmental disabilities are entitled to receive assistance in voting on election day, provided that a voter shall not  
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes     receive assistance in voting unless he is unable to read, or is unable to vote without assistance because of a physical disability, including being visually impaired. LA. STAT. ANN. § 18:564(A) & (D). 
 
Any qualified voter who submits a copy of current documentation showing 
eligibility for benefits from the office for citizens with developmental disabilities may vote absentee by mail. 
LA. STAT. ANN. § 18:1303(I). MAINE Persons under guardianship for reason of mental illness shall not be electors. ME. CONST. art. 2, § 1. 
 
Held unconstitutional by Doe v. Rowe, 156 F. Supp.2d 35 (D. Me. 2001): Found that procedures in probate courts did not give adequate due process to Plaintiffs (were not told they would be disenfranchised as a result of the guardianship process). Also found that the provision did not pass strict scrutiny because there was not factually valid correlation between the ends and the means-therefore art. 2, §1 violates the Equal Protection Clause. 
 
Individuals under guardianship may vote. 
Department of the Secretary of State 
Bureau of Corporations, Elections and Commissions, citing Doe v. Rowe 
(http://www.maine.gov/sos/cec/elec/voterinfo/right.html).  Patients in psychiatric hospitals or residential care facilities have the right to vote unless the chief administrative officer determines a need to restrict due to medical welfare, patient is adjudicated incompetent and finding not reversed, or other statute or rule restricts the right, but not solely on admission to a psychiatric hospital or residential care facility. 
ME. REV. STAT. ANN. tit. 
34-B, § 3803(1)(A-C). Persons with an intellectual disability or autism may not be denied the right to vote. ME. REV. STAT. ANN. tit. 34B, § 5605(5). MARYLAND State may regulate or prohibit the right to vote of a person under care or guardianship for mental disability. MD. CONST. art 1, § 4. 
 
Individual not qualified to be a registered voter if under guardianship for mental disability and a court of competent jurisdiction has specifically found by clear  A person may not lose the right to vote solely because of residency in a facility or a Veterans' Administration hospital for a mental disorder. MD. 
CODE ANN. HEALTH-GEN. 
§ 10-704. A person may not lose the right to vote because he or she has or is receiving services for a developmental disability. MD. CODE ANN. 
HEALTH-GEN. § 7-1004.  
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes  and convincing evidence that the individual cannot communicate, with or without accommodations, a desire to participate in the voting process. MD. CODE ANN. ELEC. 
LAW § 3-102(b)(2).    MASSACHUSETTS Every citizen...excepting persons under guardianship... shall have a right to vote in such election. MASS. CONST. art. 3.  
 
Sec of State opinion interpreting above provision to require a specific finding of incompetence to vote before disenfranchising someone. Sec. of the 
Cmmw. of Mass., Elections Div., See 
Persons Subject to Guardianships That Do Not Specifically Forbid Voting Are Eligible Voters, 41 Pub. Rec. 5 (Jan. 1991). 
 
Every citizen...not being a person under guardianship...may have his name entered on the list of voters in such city or town, and may vote therein in any such election. 
MASS. ANN. LAWS ch. 51, § 1.  No person shall be deprived of the right to vote solely on the basis of admission or commitment to a mental health facility. 104 CODE MASS. REG. 
27.13; Boyd v. Board of 
Registrars of Voters, 334 
N.E.2d 629 (Mass. 1975).  MICHIGAN Legislature may exclude persons based on mental incompetence. MICH. CONST. art. 2, § 2.  
No disqualification electoral statute.    MINNESOTA Persons under guardianship, "insane," or not mentally competent are not entitled or permitted to vote. MINN. CONST. art. 7, § 1. 
 
Read narrowly to avoid unconstitutional burden on right to vote by Minnesota Voters Alliance v. Ritchie, 890 F. Supp.2d 
1106, 1117 (D. Minn. 2012), aff'd, 720 F.3d 1029 (8th Cir. 2013). 
 
Not eligible to vote if under guardianship in which the court order revokes the right to vote or adjudicated legally incompetent. 
MINN. STAT. § 201.014(2)(b) & (c). Unless otherwise ordered by the court, the ward under guardianship retains the right to vote. MINN. STAT. § 524.5-313(c)(8). 
 
Each year, within 30 days after the anniversary date of an appointment, a guardian shall send or deliver to the ward a notice ... of the status of the ward's right to vote. MINN. STAT. § 524.5-310(g). Persons may not be deprived of the right to vote because of commitment or treatment.  Commitment or treatment of any patient is not a judicial determination of legal incompetency. MINN. 
STAT. § 253B.23(2)(a). Appointment of the commissioner as conservator shall not constitute a judicial finding that the developmentally disabled person is legally incompetent except for the restrictions which the conservatorship places on the conservatee. The appointment of a conservator shall not deprive the conservatee of the right to vote. MINN. STAT. § 252A.12. MISSISSIPPI "Idiots" and "insane" persons are not qualified electors. MISS. CONST. art. 12, § 241. 
 
Persons adjudicated to be "non compos  Admission or commitment to a treatment facility is not an adjudication of legal incompetency and does not deprive the right Admission or commitment to a treatment facility is not an adjudication of legal incompetency and does not deprive the right to vote. MISS.  
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes  mentis" shall not be entitled or permitted to vote. MISS. CODE ANN. § 23-15-11.  to vote. MISS. CODE ANN. § 41-21-101. CODE ANN. § 41-21-101. MISSOURI No person under guardianship of estate or person because of mental incapacity, where said guardian was appointed by a court of competent jurisdiction, nor person involuntarily confined in a mental institution pursuant to an adjudication of a court of competent jurisdiction can vote. MO. 
CONST. art. VIII, § 2. 
 
No person adjudicated incapacitated is entitled to vote. MO. REV. STAT. 
§ 115.133(2). 
 
Person who had been committed to mental hospital many years earlier but did not have a guardian was not disqualified under the constitutional provision. New v. 
Corrough, 370 S.W.2d 323 (Mo. 1963).    MONTANA Not a qualified elector if of "unsound mind," as determined by a court. MONT. CONST. art 4, § 2.  
No person adjudicated to be of unsound mind has the right to vote, unless he has been restored to capacity as provided by law. MONT. CODE ANN. § 13-1-111(3).    NEBRASKA Not qualified to vote if "non compos mentis," unless restored to civil rights. 
NE. CONST. art. 6, § 2. 
 
No person is qualified to vote if "non compos mentis," unless restored to civil rights. NEB. REV. STAT. § 32-313(1). "Non compos mentis" defined as "mentally incompetent" in voter registration materials. NEB. REV. STAT. § 32-312. ("Mentally incompetent" is not synonymous with being under guardianship; the latter is imposed in Nebraska based on "mental incapacity").    NEVADA No person who has been adjudicated incompetent, unless restored to legal capacity, shall be entitled to the privilege of elector. NV. CONST. art. 2, § 1. 
 
The county clerk shall cancel the voter  No person admitted to a public or private mental health facility or to a 
program of communitybased or outpatient services pursuant to this   
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes  registration if the county clerk is provided a certified copy of a court order stating that the court specifically finds by clear and convincing evidence that the person registered lacks the mental capacity to vote because he or she cannot communicate, with or without accommodations, a specific desire to participate in the voting process. NV. 
REV. STAT. ANN § 293.540(2).  chapter shall, by reason of such admission, be denied the right to vote, unless specifically adjudicated incompetent (and not restored to legal capacity). 
NV. REV. STAT. ANN. 
§ 433A.460. 
 
The medical director of a division mental health facility shall evaluate each consumer of services of that facility who has been adjudicated as a person with mental incompetence no less than once every six months to determine if there is sufficient cause to believe that such consumer remains unable to vote. NV. REV. STAT. 
ANN. § 433A.480(1).  NEW HAMPSHIRE No Constitutional disqualification provision. 
 
No disqualification electoral statute.  No person shall be deemed incompetent to vote or to exercise any other civil right solely by reason of that person's admission to the mental health services system. N.H. REV. STAT. 
ANN. § 135-C:56(II). No person shall be deemed incompetent to vote solely by reason of his or her 
developmental disability or of his or her participation in the service delivery system, nor shall department rules restrict such rights. N.H. REV. STAT. ANN. 
§ 171-A:14(I). NEW JERSEY On Nov. 6, 2007, NJ voters approved constitutional amendment. New language states: No person who has been adjudicated by a court of competent jurisdiction to lack the capacity to understand the act of voting shall enjoy the right of suffrage. Previous language stated: No person shall have the right of suffrage who is an "idiot" or "insane" person. N.J. 
CONST. art 2, § 1, ¶ 6. 
 
No person shall have the right of suffrage who has been adjudicated by a court of competent jurisdiction to lack the capacity to understand the act of voting. N.J. STAT.  Subject to any other provisions of law and the Constitution of New Jersey and the United States, no patient shall be deprived of the right to vote solely by reason of receiving treatment nor shall the treatment modify or vary any legal or civil right of any patient, including, but not limited to, the right to register for and to vote at elections. N.J. STAT. No admission or residency at a facility or receipt any service for persons with developmental disabilities shall deprive persons of their right to register and vote. N.J. STAT. ANN. § 30:6D4(a). 
 
Determination of eligibility for MR services does not create presumption of incompetency; cannot revoke right to vote based solely on placement at residential 
facility. Carroll v. Cobb, 354 A.2d  
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes  ANN. § 19:4-1(1).  ANN. § 30:4-24.2(a). 
 
Cannot be presumed incompetent because has been examined or treated for mental illness. §30:424.2(c) 
 
Persons receiving inpatient assessment or treatment may register and vote subject to laws and Constitution, nor shall the treatment modify or vary any legal or civil right of any patient, including, but not limited to, the right to register for and to vote at elections. N.J. STAT. ANN. § 30:427.11c(a). 355 (N.J. Super. Ct. 1976). NEW MEXICO Individuals who are unable to mark a ballot and concurrently also unable to communicate their voting preference cannot vote. N.M. CONST. art. 7, § 1. 
 
As used in the Election Code, "qualified elector" means any resident of the state who is qualified to vote under the provisions of the constitution of New Mexico and the constitution of the 
United States. N.M. STAT. ANN. § 1-1-4. 
 
For purposes of cancellation of registration, the legal insanity of a voter shall be ascertained by comparison of registration records with the 
certification of legal insanity filed by the court with the county clerk.  N.M. STAT. ANN. § 1-4-26(A). When in proceedings held pursuant to law, the district court determines that a mentally ill individual is insane as that term is used in the constitution of New Mexico, it shall file a certification of such fact with the county clerk of the county wherein the individual is registered. N.M. STAT. ANN. An incapacitated person for whom a guardian has been appointed retains all legal and civil rights except those which have been expressly limited by court order or have been specifically granted to the guardian by the court. N.M. STAT. ANN. § 45-5301.1. 
 
The same reservation of rights is specified for limited guardianships. N.M. STAT. ANN. § 45-5-312(A).    
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes  § 1-4-26(B). [NOTE:  This statutory provision references a former state constitutional provision barring voting by "idiots" and "insane people."  That provision 
was removed by a constitutional amendment providing that individuals are not competent to vote if they cannot mark a ballot and cannot communicate their voting preference.  On Sept. 14, 2016, the New Mexico Supreme Court made that amendment effective.] 
 
Individuals with mental retardation "who can understand the nature of their actions should be allowed to register and vote." 1974 Op. An, Gen. No. 74  35.    NEW YORK Right of suffrage and registration of voters laws shall be established by law. N.Y. CONST. ART. 2, § 5. 
 
No person who has been adjudged incompetent has the right to vote, unless later adjudged competent. N.Y. ELEC. LAW § 5-106(6).  Receipt of services for mental disability shall not deprive persons of the right to register and vote if otherwise qualified, or otherwise modify or vary such right. N.Y. MENT. HYG. 
LAW § 33.01. Receipt of services for mental disability shall not deprive persons of the right to register and vote if otherwise qualified, or otherwise modify or vary such right. N.Y. MENT. HYG. LAW § 33.01. 
 
The commissioner shall include 
in rules and regulations promulgated for community residence a statement of the rights of persons living in such residences which shall include, but not be limited to...the right to vote' and the right to participate in activities that educate persons with developmental disabilities in their civic responsibilities.  N.Y. 
MENT. HYG. LAW § 41.41. NORTH CAROLINA No Constitutional disqualification provision. 
 
However, the Constitution does provide that every person presenting himself for registration shall be able to read and write any section of the Constitution in the English language. N.C. Const. art VI, § 4 
 
No disqualification election statute.  Persons who are adult clients at a facility have the right to register and vote unless that right has been precluded by an unrevoked adjudication of incompetency. N.C. GEN. 
STAT. § 122C-58. Persons who are adult clients at a facility have the right to register and vote unless that right has been precluded by an unrevoked adjudication of incompetency. N.C. GEN. STAT. 
§ 122C-58. NORTH DAKOTA No person who has been declared mentally Except upon specific findings of the court, no ward Unless specifically Developmentally disabled  
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes  incompetent by order of a court or other authority having jurisdiction, which order has not been rescinded, shall be qualified to vote. N.D. CONST. art. 2, § 2. may be deprived of the right to vote. N.D. CENT. CODE § 30.1-28- 04(3). restricted in writing every 14 days by a patient's treating physician, physician assistant, psychiatrist, advanced practice registered nurse, or psychologist, all 
patients in treatment 
facilities retain their "civil 
rights." N.D. CENT. CODE §§ 25-03.1-40(11)25.03.1-41. persons may not be presumed to be incompetent and may not be deprived of the right to vote solely because of admission to or residency at an institution or facility, or solely because of receipt of services. N.D. CENT. 
CODE § 25-01.2-03(1). OHIO No "idiot" or "insane person" shall be entitled to the privileges of an elector. 
OHIO CONST. art 5, § 6. 
 
Voter registration is cancelled if the person is adjudicated incompetent for the purpose of voting, OHIO REV. CODE ANN. 
§ 3503.18(B).  Persons admitted to a hospital or otherwise taken into custody, voluntarily or involuntarily, may vote unless adjudicated incompetent, or unless the Revised Code specifically denies the right to vote. OHIO REV. CODE ANN. 
§ 5122.301.  Persons with mental retardation or developmental disabilities have the right to participate in the political process. OHIO REV. CODE ANN. 
§ 5123.62(W). OKLAHOMA Legislature may prescribe exceptions for qualification. 
OKLA. CONST. art. 3, § 1. 
 
Ineligible to vote if adjudicated an incapacitated person under Guardianship and Conservatorship Act, unless adjudicated no longer incapacitated; or adjudicated partially incapacitated person and right to vote restricted. OKLA. STAT. 
TIT. 26, § 4-101(2). 
 
The registration of any registered voter may be cancelled upon judicial determination of mental incapacitation under Title 30 of the Oklahoma 
Statutes. OKLA. STAT. ANN. TIT. 26 § 4120. Court shall make a specific determination of the voting capacity of a person under guardianship. 
OKLA. STAT. ANN. TIT. 30 § 3-113(B)(1).   OREGON A person "suffering from a mental handicap" is entitled to the full rights of an elector, if otherwise qualified, unless the person has been adjudicated incompetent to vote as provided by law. OR. CONST. art. 2, § 3. 
  Every person with mental illness committed to the Oregon Health Authority shall have the right to vote unless the person has been adjudicated incompetent and has not While receiving mental health services or developmental disability services, every person shall have the right to be encouraged and assisted in exercising all legal rights.  The rights described in this section  
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes  No disqualification statute.  been restored to legal capacity. OR. Rev. STAT. 
§ 426.385(1)(o). 
 
While receiving mental health services or developmental disability services, every person shall have the right to be encouraged and assisted in exercising all legal rights.  The rights described in this section are in addition to, and do not limit, all other statutory and 
constitutional rights that are afforded all citizens including the right to vote. 
OR. Rev. STAT. 
§ 430.210(2). are in addition to, and do not limit, all other statutory and constitutional rights that are afforded all citizens including the right to vote. OR. Rev. STAT. 
§ 430.210(2). PENNSYLVANIA No Constitutional disqualification provision.  
 
Subject to state law, anyone who is over twenty one, has been a citizen of the United States for at least one month, and has resided in the state and election district for the specified time may vote. PA. 
CONST. Art. 7, § 1. 
 
No disqualification election statute. 
 
A person who resides at an institution for the mentally ill or the mentally retarded can choose to vote either in the district in which the institution is located or where they were registered to vote or resided before they were institutionalized. PENN. CONSOL. STAT. ANN. TIT. 25 § 1302(a)(4). 
 
A mentally retarded or mentally ill person cannot be disenfranchised solely because he or she is undergoing treatment for a mental disability or is known to reside in an institution for the treatment of the mentally disabled.  1973 Op.Atty.Gen. Pa. No. 48. 
     
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes  A person who resides at institution for the mentally ill or mentally retarded in the state cannot lawfully be denied the right to register as a qualified elector in the voting district in which the institution is located. 
1973 Op.Atty.Gen. No. 48.    PUERTO RICO Every person over 18 can vote if he or she fulfills the other conditions determined by law. No person shall be deprived of the right to vote because he does not know how to read or write or does not own property. PR Const. Art. 6, § 4. 
 
Any citizen who has not been declared mentally incompetent by a Court of Law shall be a voter in Puerto Rico. 16 LPRA §4063.  
 
Any person who is declared mentally incompetent by a Court of Law shall not be entitled to exercise his/her right to vote, even if he/she is a qualified voter. 
16 LPRA § 4065. 
 
The Courts Administrator shall send to the Commission, on a monthly basis during an election year and on a quarterly basis during years in which elections are not held, a list of those persons who have been legally declared as mentally incompetent. 16 LPRA § 4081. 
   Any adult who receives mental health services shall continue to enjoy his/her rights, benefits and privileges pursuant to the Constitution of the United States of America and the 
Constitution of Puerto Rico, as well as state and federal laws, while receiving evaluation or treatment and rehabilitation, and during the process of admission, transfer or release in any providing institution. 24 LPRA 
§ 6154a  RHODE ISLAND No person who has been adjudicated "non compos mentis" shall be allowed to vote. R.I. CONST. art. 2, § 1. 
 
Qualified voter defined as someone who is not otherwise disqualified by law. R.I. GEN. 
LAWS § 17-1-2(13).  Patients admitted to a facility shall not be deprived of the right to vote and participate in political activity solely by reason of such admission. R.I. GEN. LAWS § 40.1-55(f)(10). Community residence resident will not be deprived of right to vote solely by reason of admission.  Each resident has right to vote and participate in political activity, including reasonable assistance when desired in registration and voting. RI. GEN. LAWS § 40.124.5-5. SOUTH CAROLINA General Assembly shall establish disqualifications for voting by reason of mental incompetence and may provide for the removal of such disqualifications. S.C. 
CONST. art. 2, § 7. 
  Unless a patient has been adjudicated incompetent, no patient may be denied the right to be a qualified elector if otherwise qualified. The county Clients of department facilities with intellectual disabilities have the right to be a qualified elector if otherwise qualified. The county board of voter registration in counties with department  
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes  A person is disqualified from registering or voting if mentally incompetent as adjudicated by a court of competent jurisdiction. S.C. CODE ANN. § 7-5- 120(B)(1).  board of voter registration in counties with department facilities reasonably shall assist patients who express a desire to vote to: (a) obtain voter registration forms, applications for absentee ballots, and absentee ballots; (b) comply with other requirements which are prerequisite for voting; (c) vote by absentee ballot if necessary. S.C. CODE. 
ANN. § 44-22-80(7). facilities reasonably shall assist clients who express a desire to vote to: (a) obtain voter registration forms, applications for absentee ballots, and absentee ballots; (b) comply with other requirements which are prerequisite for voting; (c) vote by absentee ballot if necessary. S.C. CODE ANN. 
§ 44-26-90(7). SOUTH DAKOTA Not entitled to vote if disqualified by law for mental incompetence. S.D. CONST. art. 7, § 2. 
 
Names of persons declared mentally incompetent shall be removed from the voter rolls each month. S.D. CODIFIED LAWS § 12-4-18. The appointment of a guardian or conservator of a protected person does not constitute a general finding of legal incompetence unless the court so orders, and the protected person shall otherwise retain all rights which have not been granted to the guardian or conservator. S.D. CODIFIED LAWS § 29A-5-118. [Note: Effective until July 1, 2016; beginning July 1, 2016, this section has been amended to read as follows: 
The appointment of a guardian or conservator of a protected person does not constitute a general finding of legal incompetence unless the court so orders, and the protected person shall otherwise retain all rights which have not been granted to the guardian or conservator, with the exception of the ability to create an agency and confer authority on another person to do any act that the protected person might do, pursuant to Section 59-2-1.] 
 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person may be deemed incompetent to register and vote solely by reason of his detention, admission, or commitment under this title. S.D. CODIFIED 
LAWS § 27A-12-1.2. No person is incompetent to register and vote solely by reason of a diagnosis of a developmental disability, or by reason of a commitment by a county review board. S.D. 
CODIFIED LAWS § 27B-7-44 (replaced old language in 2000 under SL 2000, ch 131, § 76). TENNESSEE No Constitutional disqualification provision. 
 
No disqualification election statute. May remove the right to vote if placed under a conservatorship. Petition for appointment of a conservator should include the rights that will be removed. Tenn. Code Ann. § 34-3-104(8). No person with mental illness, serious emotional disturbance, or developmental disability hospitalized or admitted, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, or ordered to participate in nonresidential treatment or service under this title shall, solely by reason of such hospitalization, admission, or order be No person with mental illness, serious emotional disturbance, or developmental disability hospitalized or admitted, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, or ordered to participate in non-residential treatment or service under this title shall, solely by reason of such hospitalization, admission, or order be denied the right to vote, unless (1) the service recipient has been adjudicated  
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes    denied the right to vote, unless (1) the service recipient has been adjudicated incompetent by a court of competent jurisdiction and has not been restored to legal capacity; or (2) the denial is authorized by state or federal statute. TENN. CODE ANN. § 33-3- 102(a). incompetent by a court of competent jurisdiction and has not been restored to legal capacity; or (2) the denial is authorized by state or federal statute. TENN. CODE ANN. § 333-102(a). TEXAS Persons determined mentally incompetent by a court shall not be allowed to vote, subject to such exceptions as the 
Legislature may make. TEX. CONST. art. 6, § 1. 
 
A person who has been determined totally mentally incapacitated or partially mentally incapacitated without the right to vote by a final judgment of a court exercising probate jurisdiction is not a qualified voter. TEX. 
ELEC. CODE ANN. Tit. 2, § 11.002(a)(3). 
 
To be eligible to register as a voter, must not have been determined totally mentally incapacitated or partially mentally incapacitated without the right to vote by a final judgment of a court exercising probate jurisdiction. TEX. ELEC. CODE ANN. Tit. 2, § 13.001(a)(3).  Patients have the right to register and vote unless specific law limits rights under a special procedure. 
TEX. HEALTH & SAFETY CODE ANN. Tit. 7, 
§ 576.001(b)(1). Persons with an intellectual disability have the rights, benefits, and privileges guaranteed by the constitution and laws of the United States and this state. TEX. HEALTH & SAFETY CODE ANN. Tit. 7, § 592.011. 
 
Persons with an intellectual disability have the right to a presumption of competency. TEX HEALTH & SAFETY CODE ANN. 
Tit. 7, § 592.021. UTAH A person who is mentally incompetent may not be permitted to vote, unless right to vote restored as provided by statute. UTAH CONST. art. 4, § 6. 
 
No disqualification election statute.  Subject to the general rules of the division, and except to the extent that 
the director or his designee determines that it is necessary for the welfare of the patient to impose restrictions, every patient is entitled to: exercise...the right to...vote, unless the patient has been adjudicated to be incompetent and has not been restored to legal capacity. UTAH CODE Subject to the general rules of the division, and except to the extent that the director or his designee determines that it is necessary for the welfare of the patient to impose restrictions, every patient is entitled to: exercise...the right to...vote, unless the patient has been adjudicated to be Incompetent and has not been restored to legal capacity. UTAH CODE ANN. 
§ 62A-15-641(1)(c).  
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes    ANN. § 62A-15-641(1)(c). 
 
When any right of a patient is limited or denied, the nature, extent, and reason for that limitation or denial shall be entered in the patient's treatment record. Any continuing denial or limitation shall be reviewed every 30 days. UTAH CODE ANN. § 62A15-641 (2).  VERMONT To be entitled to the privilege of voting, persons must be of "a quiet and peaceable behavior." VT. CONST. ch. II, § 42. 
 
No disqualifying election statute. Any person over 18 who is a citizen of the United States and a resident of the state of Vermont and has taken the voter's oath may vote. VT. STAT. ANN. TIT. 17 § 2121 A person under guardianship retains the same legal and civil rights guaranteed to all Vermont residents under the Vermont and United States Constitutions and all the laws and regulations of Vermont and the United States.  VT. STAT. ANN. TIT. 14 § 3068a Subject to the general rules and regulations of the hospital and except to the extent that the head of the hospital determines that it is necessary for the medical welfare or needs of the patient or the hospital to impose restrictions, every patient has the right to vote on his own initiative, unless he has been adjudicated incompetent and has not been restored to legal capacity. VT. 
STAT. ANN. TIT. 18 
§ 7705(a)(3)   
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes VIRGINIA As prescribed by law, no person adjudicated to be mentally incompetent shall be qualified to vote until his competency has been reestablished. 
VA. CONST. art. 2, § 1. 
 
No person adjudicated incapacitated shall be a qualified voter unless his capacity has been reestablished as provided by law. VA. 
CODE ANN. §24.2-101. 
 
Election laws referring to "mentally incompetent" and "incapacitated" as standards for disqualifying person from voting are not in conflict. Op. Att'y Gen. of Va, 01-102, Dec. 10, 2001.    WASHINGTON All persons while they are judicially declared mentally incompetent are excluded from the elective franchise. 
WA. CONST. art. 6, § 3. 
 
Upon receiving official notice that a court has imposed a guardianship for an incapacitated person and has determined that the person is incompetent for the purpose of 
rationally exercising the right to vote, under chapter 11.88 RCW, if the person is a registered voter in the county, the county auditor shall cancel the person's voter registration. WASH. REV. CODE ANN. 
§ 29A.08.515. Imposition of a guardianship for an incapacitated person shall not result in the loss of the right to vote unless the court determines that the person is incompetent for purposes of rationally exercising the franchise in that the individual lacks the capacity to understand the nature and effect of voting such that she or he cannot make an individual choice. The court order establishing guardianship shall specify whether or not the individual retains voting rights. When a court determines that the person is incompetent for the purpose of rationally exercising the right to vote, the court shall notify the appropriate county auditor. 
RCWA 11.88.010 (5). No person shall be presumed incompetent as a consequence of receiving an evaluation or voluntary or involuntary treatment for a mental disorder, under this chapter or any prior laws of this state dealing with mental illness. Competency shall not be determined or withdrawn except under the provisions of chapter 10.77 or 11.88 RCW. WASH. REV. CODE ANN. 
§71.05.360(1)(b). The existence of developmental disabilities does not affect the civil rights of the person with the developmental disability except as otherwise provided by law. 
WASH. REV. CODE ANN. 
§71A.10.030(1). 
 
The secretary's determination under RCW 71A.16.040 that a person is eligible for services under this title shall not deprive the person of any civil rights or privileges. The secretary's determination alone shall not constitute cause to declare the person to be legally incompetent. 
WASH. REV. CODE ANN. 
§71A.10.030(2).  
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes WEST VIRGINIA No person who has been declared mentally incompetent by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be permitted to vote while such disability continues. W. VA. CONST. art. 4, § 1. 
 
No person who has been declared mentally incompetent by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be permitted to vote while such disability continues, unless otherwise specifically provided by federal or state code. W. VA. CODE § 31-3. 
 
Any person who has been declared mentally incompetent by a court of competent jurisdiction is disqualified and shall not be eligible to register or to continue to be registered to vote for as long as that disability continues. W. VA. CODE § 3-2-2(b). 
 
If adjudicated incompetent, a person is automatically denied the right to vote. No specific decision regarding capacity for voting is required. 58 Op. 
Atty. Gen. W. Va. 220, Mar. 28, 1980.  No person may be deprived of any civil right solely by reason of his or her receipt of services for mental illness, intellectual disability or addiction, nor does the receipt of the services modify or vary any civil right of the person, including, but not limited to, the right to register and vote, but a person who has been adjudged incompetent pursuant to article eleven (§§ 2711-1 et seq.)[Note: Art. 11 repealed] of this chapter and who has not been restored to legal competency may be deprived of such rights. Involuntary commitment pursuant 
to this article does not of itself relieve the patient of legal capacity. W. VA. CODE §27- 5-9(a). 
 
W. VA. CODE § 27-5-9(a) does not conflict with the constitutional provision in art. 4, § 1. 58 Op. Atty. Gen. W. Va. 220, Mar. 28, 1980. No person may be deprived of any civil right solely by reason of his or her receipt of services for mental illness, intellectual disability or addiction, nor does the receipt of the services modify or vary any civil right of the person, including, but not limited to, the right to register and vote, but a person who has been adjudged incompetent pursuant to article eleven (§§ 27-11-1 et seq.)[Note: Art. 11 repealed] of this chapter and who has not been restored to legal competency may be deprived of such rights. Involuntary commitment pursuant to this article does not of itself relieve the patient of legal capacity. W. VA. CODE § 27- 5-9(a). 
  
STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes WISCONSIN Laws may be enacted excluding from the right of suffrage persons adjudged by a court to be incompetent or partially incompetent, unless the judgment specifies that the person is capable of understanding the objective of the elective process or the judgment is set aside. WIS. CONST. art. 3, §2(4)(b). 
 
Any person who is incapable of 
understanding the objective of the elective process or who is under guardianship may not vote, unless the court has determined that the person is competent to exercise the right to vote. WIS. STAT. § 6.03(1)(a). 
 
No person may be denied the right to register to vote or the right to vote by reason that the person is alleged to be incapable of understanding the objective of the elective process unless the person has been adjudicated incompetent in this state. If a determination of incompetency of the person has already been made, or if a determination of limited incompetency has been made that does not include a specific finding that the subject is competent to exercise the right to vote, and a guardian has been appointed as a result of any such determination, then no determination of incapacity of understanding the objective of the elective process is required unless the guardianship is terminated or modified under section 54.64. WIS. STAT. § 6.03(3). The court may, as part of a proceeding under WIS. STAT. ANN. § 54.44 in which an individual is found incompetent and a guardian is appointed, declare that the individual has incapacity to exercise the right to register to vote or to vote in an election, if the court finds that the individual is incapable of understanding the objective of the elective process.  Also, in accordance with section 6.03(3), any elector of a municipality may petition the circuit court for a determination that an individual residing in the municipality is incapable of understanding the objective of the elective process and thereby ineligible to register to vote or to vote in an election. This determination shall be made by the court in accordance with the procedures specified in this paragraph. If a petition is filed under this subd. 1. g., the finding of the court shall be limited to a determination as to voting eligibility. WIS. STAT. ANN. § 54.25(2)(c)(1)(g).  A person is not deemed incompetent to vote solely based on admission to a facility under the developmental disabilities and mental health chapter. WIS. STAT. ANN. 
§ 51.59(1). A person is not deemed incompetent to vote solely based on admission to a facility under the developmental disabilities and mental health chapter. WIS. 
STAT. ANN. § 51.59(1). STATE State Constitution/ Electoral Statutes: Persons Disqualified Guardianship/ Conservatorship Statutes Mental Health Statutes Developmental Disabilities/ Mental Retardation Statutes WYOMING All persons adjudicated to be mentally incompetent, unless restored to civil rights, are excluded from the elective franchise. 
WYO. CONST. art. 6 § 6. 
 
No person is a qualified elector who is a currently adjudicated mentally incompetent person and his civil or voting rights have not been restored. WYO. STAT. ANN. 
§ 22-1-102(a)(xxvi).     



[1] This table is based on the table published by Kay Schriner, Lisa Ochs, & Todd Shields, Democratic Dilemmas: Notes on the ADA & Voting Rights of People with Cognitive and Emotional Impairments, 21 BERKLEY J. EMP. & LAB. L. 437 (2000). The table was updated by the National Disability Rights Network (NDRN) in June 2004, and by the Bazelon Center for Mental Health Law and the law firm of Schulte Roth & Zabel in 2016. 
